Dear fellow practitioners, today I, Tâm Chiếu
Hoàn Quán,
would like to share my thoughts on the terms "True Dharma," "
Left Dharma," and "Degenerate Dharma." A few
days ago, I
heard a professor discussing the term "Degenerate Dharma," but he
disagreed with its existence. He
argued that this era is characterized by economic
development and national progress. He questioned why it was called "
Degenerate Dharma," stating that it violates certain principles and is incorrect. This is something you may not understand, dear fellow practitioners. So today, I, Tâm Chiếu Hoàn Quán, would like to explain these three terms: True Dharma, Left Dharma, and Degenerate Dharma.
First, the term "
True Dharma" has two
meanings: true
Dharma versus Left Dharma.
True Dharma is based on truth and reality, while Left Dharma is
not based on truth or reality. It is formed by the
perceptions and judgments of certain individuals,
thus creating a viewpoint within
a particular religion, such as Buddhism.
We call this the true Dharma. Why is this the
Buddhist viewpoint called the
true Dharma? Because it is the truth
operating in this universe. Humans are also
governed by the law of cause and effect: birth, aging,
sickness, and death. All sentient beings are subject
to birth, aging, sickness, and death, and the cause and effect of good and evil
in their actions. In
this realm, sentient beings live
in six realms:
heaven, humans, animals, hungry ghosts, and
hell. That is the truth of
this realm. And there is another place, Nirvana, a
place of complete happiness without suffering.
That is the truth of this realm.
Humans are subject to the operation of cause and effect in
their own thoughts, words, and actions.
That is the truth existing in
this realm. All sentient beings are governed by
this cause and effect, so we call it the true Dharma, or right view.
This true Dharma, we call right view, means
having a right view. That is, a concept, an
opinion that is correct according to the truth, correct according to
its nature, without any difference or error. Wrong view, on the other hand,
is a viewpoint, an
opinion that is incorrect.  With the
truth not matching the nature... And in the
other part, the main Dharma,
we are called having right views, called
right views. That's regarding the main Dharma
and wrong Dharma, that's how
we call them. As for the phrase "the
period of the Right Dharma" and "the
period of the End Dharma,"
it's a general term for all
religions. The period when the religious leader
begins to preach the
Dharma of that religion is called the
period of the Right Dharma. For example, in a religion
like Taoism or
Confucianism, from the day
Confucius spoke, that is called
the period of the Right Dharma. That is, the time when
he first spoke, the right Dharma
of that religion, Confucianism, that is the time of the Right Dharma.
After Confucius
passed away, his successors
spoke, and that is called the period of the
Subsequent Dharma. That is, this Dharma is
similar, similar to the time when
Confucius spoke. And the period of the End
Dharma is when there are no longer any
disciples who received the
teachings from Confucius.  Through books and
then through oral transmission to others, it is
called the Age of Decline (Maha-Dharma). In Buddhism,
the Age of True Dharma is the time when the Buddha was alive. The Age of
Subsequent Dharma is the time when the
saints, as taught by the Buddha,
went forth to spread the Dharma. This is called the Age of Subsequent Dharma.
This is the Age of Decline because there are no longer disciples taught by the Buddha leading sentient beings. This is the age when there are no longer Sariputta, Maudgalyayana,
Alan, or
Kasyapa; they have all passed away. So what do
we call
this age? The Age of Decline (Maha-Dharma-Maha) is
called the Age of Decline. In
this Age of Decline, only teachings passed down orally, through scriptures, remain. This Age of Decline is also
called the Age of Decline because few people practice
according to the true Dharma as taught by the Buddha. In this Age of Decline,
sometimes the scriptures are infiltrated by heretics, sometimes
they write things that
we cannot recognize.
What are the Buddha's teachings and what are
not? What are the
100-part teachings and what are only
80, 20, or 30-part teachings?
In the Buddhist scriptures or in the
Buddha's teachings, the Buddha
taught that if you seek enlightenment based on appearances, you will
not attain it. However, later on,
there was a view that if a person dies and their
head feels hot, they will be reborn in the Western Pure Land.
That is a viewpoint introduced into
Buddhism, but Buddhism does not have that concept.
Buddhism does not rely on the corpse because even
Venerable Moggallana's
body disintegrated when he entered Nirvana.
If that were the case, where would the head come from to feel
hot? Yet, he still attained Nirvana, did
n't he, dear fellow practitioners?
Therefore, that viewpoint gradually led to many
other viewpoints being incorporated into Buddhism.
That's why Buddhism has the Four Dharma Seals.
When we read any sutra,
we must analyze whether it
contains one of the four Dharma Seals.
Suffering, impermanence, non-self, and emptiness. If
these four aspects exist, then we
can consider them to be the Buddha's teachings.
That's proof. We must also examine them
very carefully; they must be linked to cause and effect.
In all the sutras, there must
be self-awareness and
awareness of others. It cannot be completely awareness of others. There
must be self-awareness and awareness of others for
us to truly believe that these are the
Buddha's teachings. Therefore, in
this Age of Decline, the Buddha's teachings have been
partially lost. Some remain intact, some are
not.
In another Age of Decline, it is
said that sentient beings
no longer follow the Buddha's teachings,
few
people follow the Buddha's teachings, so it is called the
Age of Decline. Then comes the Age of the End of the Dharma,
meaning the Buddha's teachings are completely destroyed, there is
no
longer a Buddha, no
disciples taught by the Buddha, and
no more scriptures. That is called the
Age of the End of the Dharma. It doesn't mention the
economic and social situation, is that clear,
Master of the Right Dharma?  The Dharma teacher and the
Dharma teacher don't mention anything about
socio-economics; they only talk about
people no longer believing in karma. In
this Dharma-ending age, people who believe in
karma are few and far between. In the time of the end of the Dharma,
no one will believe in karma anymore,
dear fellow practitioners. They only think
about receiving blessings here or death,
or that's the end, or something like that. The shadow of the
doctrine of karma is gone,
meaning the end of the Dharma, the end of the Buddha's teachings. There's
no
trace of karma anymore; it's
entirely the viewpoint
of theocracy or atheism. They don't
talk
about economics, politics, society, or
what kind of people they are. And in the present
world, people often
say that people are also experiencing a decline in
virtue. What does "decline in virtue" mean?
It means that good virtue is less than in the past. It's
like when we
go to school, we get the observation that
morality is weak, poor, or
average. Dear fellow practitioners, you see?  Is
n't that right? In this era,
morality has indeed declined.
When materialism becomes excessive, morality
weakens. For example, in the
old days, when science
wasn't developed, people fought
with only horses and swords, and few people
died, right?
But in this era, with the development of science,
dropping a bomb kills
countless people, and with biological weapons,
morality has declined. There's
no longer much compassion for people.
That's only considering
one aspect, the
bad in people's hearts,
not the good. For example,
children are less filial now than in the
past. We have to acknowledge that, do
n't we, dear friends? Children are
less filial and less
responsible than in the past. We
acknowledge that this reflects the majority, not that there are
no filial children left in this society. It's not that people are saying that
virtues are scarce.  Fewer people
cooperate with each other.
Back then,
people had regulations, and those were based on virtue and morality. In the feudal
era,
there were
family ethics, for example,
if someone committed adultery, they would shave their head and smear it with
lime, right? So there was less
adultery then. But now,
fewer people commit adultery. Back then,
few people committed adultery, now few
people don't. Does this mean that
the morality of responsibility towards family,
of cherishing marital affection, has
weakened? Has it diminished? It means that the virtue of
love and responsibility has decreased, and the
sincerity has diminished, and the
sense of common good has decreased. For example,
during the resistance war for independence,
was human morality high? You all gave each other
very high morality, but
now, the sacrifice for each other has decreased, right?
Compared to before, it has
decreased, and that's what we call decline, right?
Therefore, the word...  In the past, there was nothing
insulting about that phrase; it
was simply a
term to describe something, but it didn't
have any insulting nature. So,
we must understand that this
is the Age of Decline, meaning that although there are
many people, the number of those who believe in
karma is small. In the time of the Buddha,
because it was the true Dharma, many people believed
in karma, so many people attained enlightenment during
a sermon.
Now, however,
many people criticize a sermon. It's completely
different. In the past, was
n't it? At home, with our parents, if someone was
killing, and we told them, "Whoever
kills will face karmic consequences later," they would suffer
health problems. Sometimes we would even get severely
scolded, wouldn't we, dear fellow
practitioners? But in the time of the Buddha, the
Buddha could teach people to
abandon killing. But
now, even speaking the truth is
difficult. In the past, people thought differently. So, in
this day and age, people think differently.  But you also have to
observe, look at, criticize, look at people's faces,
look at the target, look at everything before you
dare to speak. In the old days, people lived carefree and
comfortably. They said whatever they wanted, there was no problem, right?
Their hearts were honest. But
now, finding the element that allows us to speak honestly
with each other is something we are cultivating to be able to
speak more honestly with each other. You
have to cultivate to be able to speak honestly with each other; if you haven't cultivated, you can't
speak honestly with
each other, right, dear fellow practitioners? We are only comparing the time before we started cultivating and the time we did. Before, we didn't dare to speak the truth much, but now that we are cultivating, we can
speak the truth with each other more. If a husband and wife cultivate together, they can
speak the truth with each other more. But if a husband and wife don't cultivate, it's like sleeping in the same bed but dreaming different dreams; that is, they are together but have thoughts and feelings that they can't express to each other. But if
both husband and wife are Buddhists, it will
increase, progress, progress, and
later they can talk about anything with each other.
If they both practice
Buddhism, then their honesty will be much
greater.  So, in
our hearts, we call it the Righteous Heart, the Righteous Mind, and so on.
Otherwise, the virtue will weaken and
diminish. Therefore, the term "
Degenerate Dharma" refers to two things: firstly, it refers
to the Dharma and the worship of the true
Dharma of a religion. The term "Degenerate Dharma" is used
to compare with the true Dharma of a religion;
it doesn't have the nature of insulting
others. We must understand this
clearly. And here, we also draw a
lesson, dear fellow practitioners: when
criticizing, we should
also do our research. So,
here, the Mind-Illuminating Enlightenment has
shared about the true Dharma
and the false Dharma. Then, the true Dharma and the Degenerate Dharma. When the true Dharma
leads to the false Dharma, we must consider
what is right view and
wrong view. And when the true Dharma illuminates the Degenerate Dharma,
we must add the time of the true Dharma and
the time of the Degenerate Dharma. It refers to a period of time.
That time is when there is a religious leader, and when there are
no longer a religious leader or disciples.  The
master
taught, and that disciple went around preaching
it, and then it was all over, there was no trace of
anyone left. That's what's called the Age of
Decline, the Age of Decline. That's the mind-controlling, the practice of the
Dharma, sharing this so we can
understand the meanings of the phrases "
right Dharma," "wrong Dharma," and "Decline Dharma," and also
another meaning: "right Dharma," "wrong Dharma," "image Dharma,"
and "Decline Dharma." That's the full meaning. And when
we say, "sister," "
brother," or "you" are practicing wrong Dharma, "wrong Dharma"
refers to viewpoints that are not in accordance with the True Dharma.
We only use this term in
religion, in religious texts.
[music]
K [
music]